README.md, before:

Simulation-based illustration and evaluation of the `flapper` family of
algorithms
================
Edward Lavender<sup>1,2\*</sup>

<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

<sup>1</sup> Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St Andrews,
Scotland  
<sup>2</sup> Centre for Research into Ecological and Environmental
Modelling, University of St Andrews, Scotland

<sup>\*</sup> This repository is maintained by Edward Lavender
(<el72@st-andrews.ac.uk>).

[![Project Status: Active – The project has reached a stable, usable
state and is being actively
developed.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)

## Introduction

The `flapper` family of algorithms is a suite of mechanistic approaches
designed to reconstruct fine-scale movement paths and emergent patterns
of space use from discrete detections in passive acoustic telemetry
arrays. This repository illustrates applications of these algorithms
using simulated datasets. The performance and sensitivity of alternative
methods is compared in terms of how well they recover simulated patterns
of space use under different circumstances (e.g., passive acoustic
telemetry array designs).

<img src="README_banner.png"/>

*Figure 1. Example outputs of the `flapper_sim` project showing a
simulated array and movement path alongside patterns of space use
reconstructed by different algorithms.*

## Prerequisites

Simulations and analyses are written in `R` and organised as an
`RStudio Project` with `{renv}`. For data simulation, processing and
analysis, the [`flapper`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/flapper) `R`
package is required. For visualisation,
[`prettyGraphics`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/prettyGraphics) is
used, which is a dependency in
[`flapper`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/flapper). For quick data
summaries, the
[`utils.add`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/utils.add) package is
used on a few occasions.

## Structure

1.  `R/` contains scripts for data simulation and analysis.

    - `helper.R` contains set up code and defines helper functions.

    - `sim_data.R` simulates data for analysis:

      - Array designs are simulated using `flapper::sim_array()`;
      - Movement paths are simulated using `flapper::sim_path_sa()`;
      - For each movement path and array design, observations arising
        from movement—namely, detections at receivers—are simulated via
        `flapper::sim_detections()`;
      - A directory system within `data` (see below), within which
        results from the analyses of these simulated data are stored, is
        also set up;

    - `sim_workhorse.R` provides methods for implementing the `flapper`
      family of algorithms to simulated data (using both ‘correct’ and
      ‘mis-specified’ parameters).

    - `sim_implement.R` is a wrapper that, for each simulated movement
      path, array design and set of algorithm parameters, implements
      `sim_workhorse` to generate outputs.

    - `sim_illustrate.R` illustrates the main outputs of the `flapper`
      family of algorithms.

    - `sim_evaluate.R` and `sim_evaluate_spatstat.R` evaluate the
      performance of the `flapper` family of algorithms, when applied
      ‘correctly’, in different array designs and
      `sim_evaluate_wall_time.R` calculates the wall time for the
      simulations.

    - `sim_sensitivity.R` examines the sensitivity of the `flapper`
      algorithms applied using different parameter ‘estimates’.

2.  `data/` contains data for the project.

3.  `fig/` contains figures.

Note that `data/` and `fig/` are not included in the online version of
this repository.

## Workflow

1.  Open the `RStudio Project` and use `{renv}` to restore the local
    project library.

2.  Run `sim_data.R` to simulate datasets, customising the array designs
    and movement path parameters as necessary\*.

3.  Implement algorithms for a specific movement path, array and
    parameter set via `sim_workhorse.R` or for all movement paths, array
    designs and parameter sets via `sim_implement.R`\*. Note that for
    the former, the movement path, array ID and parameter set need to be
    specified at the top of the script.

4.  Evaluate algorithm outputs when applied ‘correctly’ via
    `sim_illustrate.R`, `sim_evaluate.R`, `sim_evaluate_spatstat.R` and
    `sim_evaluate_wall_time.R`.

5.  Examine algorithm sensitivity via `sim_sensitivity.R`.

6.  Examine outputs in `data/` and `fig/`, such as the example figure
    below.

\*For the first implementation of this project, ensure that all sections
that create data are set to `TRUE` rather than `FALSE` (in which case
previously created files are loaded and used for analysis).

<img src="README_img.png"/>

*Figure 2. An example comparison of methods for reconstructing simulated
patterns of movement and space use, derived from an application of the
`flapper_sim` project.*

## Packages

This repository uses a number of non-default packages, available from
[The Comprehensive R Archive Network](https://cran.r-project.org). These
can be installed with `install.packages()`. Three packages that are only
available on [GitHub](https://github.com/) are also used:

- [`flapper`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/flapper). This package
  provides tools for the simulation, processing and analysis of passive
  acoustic telemetry data, including the `flapper` family of algorithms.
- [`prettyGraphics`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/prettyGraphics).
  This package is used for plotting.
- [`utils.add`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/utils.add). The
  `utils.add::basic_stats()` function is sometimes used as a convenient
  routine for summarising data. This could be replaced by base `R`
  functions, such as `summary()`.

## Citation

Lavender et al. (in prep). A semi-stochastic modelling framework for
passive acoustic telemetry.

Commit message:

Update badges (inactive + Zenodo) & citation (in press)

README.md, after:

Simulation-based illustration and evaluation of the `flapper` family of
algorithms
================
Edward Lavender<sup>1,2\*</sup>

<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

<sup>1</sup> Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St Andrews,
Scotland  
<sup>2</sup> Centre for Research into Ecological and Environmental
Modelling, University of St Andrews, Scotland

<sup>\*</sup> This repository is maintained by Edward Lavender
(<el72@st-andrews.ac.uk>).

[![Project Status: Inactive – The project has reached a stable, usable
state but is no longer being actively developed; support/maintenance
will be provided as time
allows.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/inactive.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#inactive)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/401989836.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/401989836)

## Introduction

The `flapper` family of algorithms is a suite of mechanistic approaches
designed to reconstruct fine-scale movement paths and emergent patterns
of space use from discrete detections in passive acoustic telemetry
arrays. This repository illustrates applications of these algorithms
using simulated datasets. The performance and sensitivity of alternative
methods is compared in terms of how well they recover simulated patterns
of space use under different circumstances (e.g., passive acoustic
telemetry array designs).

<img src="README_banner.png"/>

*Figure 1. Example outputs of the `flapper_sim` project showing a
simulated array and movement path alongside patterns of space use
reconstructed by different algorithms.*

## Prerequisites

Simulations and analyses are written in `R` and organised as an
`RStudio Project` with `{renv}`. For data simulation, processing and
analysis, the [`flapper`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/flapper) `R`
package is required. For visualisation,
[`prettyGraphics`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/prettyGraphics) is
used, which is a dependency in
[`flapper`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/flapper). For quick data
summaries, the
[`utils.add`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/utils.add) package is
used on a few occasions.

## Structure

1.  `R/` contains scripts for data simulation and analysis.

    - `helper.R` contains set up code and defines helper functions.

    - `sim_data.R` simulates data for analysis:

      - Array designs are simulated using `flapper::sim_array()`;
      - Movement paths are simulated using `flapper::sim_path_sa()`;
      - For each movement path and array design, observations arising
        from movement—namely, detections at receivers—are simulated via
        `flapper::sim_detections()`;
      - A directory system within `data` (see below), within which
        results from the analyses of these simulated data are stored, is
        also set up;

    - `sim_workhorse.R` provides methods for implementing the `flapper`
      family of algorithms to simulated data (using both ‘correct’ and
      ‘mis-specified’ parameters).

    - `sim_implement.R` is a wrapper that, for each simulated movement
      path, array design and set of algorithm parameters, implements
      `sim_workhorse` to generate outputs.

    - `sim_illustrate.R` illustrates the main outputs of the `flapper`
      family of algorithms.

    - `sim_evaluate.R` and `sim_evaluate_spatstat.R` evaluate the
      performance of the `flapper` family of algorithms, when applied
      ‘correctly’, in different array designs and
      `sim_evaluate_wall_time.R` calculates the wall time for the
      simulations.

    - `sim_sensitivity.R` examines the sensitivity of the `flapper`
      algorithms applied using different parameter ‘estimates’.

2.  `data/` contains data for the project.

3.  `fig/` contains figures.

Note that `data/` and `fig/` are not included in the online version of
this repository.

## Workflow

1.  Open the `RStudio Project` and use `{renv}` to restore the local
    project library.

2.  Run `sim_data.R` to simulate datasets, customising the array designs
    and movement path parameters as necessary\*.

3.  Implement algorithms for a specific movement path, array and
    parameter set via `sim_workhorse.R` or for all movement paths, array
    designs and parameter sets via `sim_implement.R`\*. Note that for
    the former, the movement path, array ID and parameter set need to be
    specified at the top of the script.

4.  Evaluate algorithm outputs when applied ‘correctly’ via
    `sim_illustrate.R`, `sim_evaluate.R`, `sim_evaluate_spatstat.R` and
    `sim_evaluate_wall_time.R`.

5.  Examine algorithm sensitivity via `sim_sensitivity.R`.

6.  Examine outputs in `data/` and `fig/`, such as the example figure
    below.

\*For the first implementation of this project, ensure that all sections
that create data are set to `TRUE` rather than `FALSE` (in which case
previously created files are loaded and used for analysis).

<img src="README_img.png"/>

*Figure 2. An example comparison of methods for reconstructing simulated
patterns of movement and space use, derived from an application of the
`flapper_sim` project.*

## Packages

This repository uses a number of non-default packages, available from
[The Comprehensive R Archive Network](https://cran.r-project.org). These
can be installed with `install.packages()`. Three packages that are only
available on [GitHub](https://github.com/) are also used:

- [`flapper`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/flapper). This package
  provides tools for the simulation, processing and analysis of passive
  acoustic telemetry data, including the `flapper` family of algorithms.
- [`prettyGraphics`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/prettyGraphics).
  This package is used for plotting.
- [`utils.add`](https://github.com/edwardlavender/utils.add). The
  `utils.add::basic_stats()` function is sometimes used as a convenient
  routine for summarising data. This could be replaced by base `R`
  functions, such as `summary()`.

## Citation

Lavender et al. (in press). A semi-stochastic modelling framework for
passive acoustic telemetry. Methods in Ecology and Evolution.
